## What: Introductions and Definitions

### Background

This article started out as a response to
[The Factory Pattern - Design Patterns meet the Frontend][1]
by Colum Ferry on dev.to, but at this point I think I rambled in enough
different directions that it is no longer a direct response. But that's where
my head was at when I started writing this. And now you know.

### Factories
The Factory Pattern is a classic design pattern from the world of <abbr
title="Object Oriented Programming">OOP</abbr>, where it is used for one or
both of the following reasons:

1. to create multiple instances of a class, and/or

2. to extend a base class. e.g. a `VehicleFactory` might return a `Car` or a
   `Plane` while hiding the implementation details for a `Vehicle`.

See the [previously mentioned dev.to article][1] for an overview of that functionality.

My intent here is to show how this pattern, with slight modifications, can be
used in Functional Programing for pretty much the same reasons.

[1]: https://dev.to/coly010/the-factory-pattern-design-patterns-meet-the-frontend-1p2l

## Why: Problems with Classes

I advocate for using objects and factories and mixins because they are good
abstractions, patterns, and practices.

I also advocate for *not* using classes because I think they are not good
abstractions.

This section (not so) briefly touches on my main reasons for disliking JS
classes, and as such, is intended to serve as a sort of motivation for not
using them, and for using the recommended alternatives instead.

The reasons I don't like JS classes are these:

1. There Are No Classes in JavaScript
2. Promotion of "Bad JavaScript"
3. Classical Inheritance
4. Wrong Abstraction

### There Are No Classes in JavaScript

Look, words matter and telling the truth is important.

These are the facts:

- There are no classes in JavaScript
- JavaScript has prototypes

> JavaScript classes, introduced in ECMAScript 2015, are primarily syntactical
> sugar over JavaScript's existing prototype-based inheritance. The class
> syntax does not introduce a new object-oriented inheritance model to
> JavaScript.
>
> [mdn](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Classes)

Before talking about anything else whatsoever--before talking about things like
effeciency, correctness, or expressiveness--classes are dishonest
representations of how JavaScript works. They hide and obfuscate the way prototypes behave.

At the very worst, they are a gotcha for programmers coming from OOP languages
like Java that *actually have* classes, and given that context will expect JS
classes to behave a certain way. (In fairness, JS classes mostly *do* behave
like classes. But they're still *not* classes.)

### Promotion of "Bad JavaScript"

Before the widespread adoption of classes, it was my personal observation that
it was easier to avoid both seeing and using problematic language keywords like
`new` and `this`. I see them more frequently now as people wrangle with scoping
and binding because of classes.

It also introduces *new* problematic complexity through constructors and
`super`. It only takes a few seconds to remember whether you have to call
`super` or not, but that lost time is a distraction.

### Classical Inheritance

One of the reasons that OOP is broken/falling out of favor/heavily criticized
is because of classical inheritance. And people know this. Even within the OOP
community, it is known that *composition is favored over inheritance*.

JS classes promote classical inheritance through use of the `extends` keyword.
That is, creating "is a" relationships between objects: a car "is a" vehicle,
and a Toyota "is a" car, and a Prius "is a" Toyota.

Classical inheritance, as a means of describing data, starts to break down
fairly quickly given a small degree of complexity for a couple reasons,
including the following:

1. The Sandwich Problem
2. The Diamond Problem
3. The Banana Problem

#### The Sandwich Problem

There's a whole contentious meme about the Sandwich Problem. People seriously
get up in arms about it. My cousin won't even speak to me any more because of
the fight we had last Thanksgiving about sandwiches.

Here's your chance to play along, Dear Reader. How many of the following items
have an "is a" relationship to "Sandwich?"

- Hoagie
- Taco
- Salad wrap
- Quesadilla
- Raviolli
- Poptart
- Ice Cream Sandwich
- Burrito

Look, here's the deal. The most basic definition of a sandwich is this: some
kind of a filling (usually meat, cheese, and/or veggies), enclosed by some kind
of a container/wrapper (usually bread).

The very second you try to enforce more than that, stuff falls apart:

- Two slices of bread? What about hinged bread like a subway/hero/footlong/etc?

- Hinged bread is okay? Then why not tacos or gyros? A quesadilla is hinged
  bread.

- If hinged breads are okay then why not "round breads?" What about wraps? What
  about burritos?

- Stuffed sandwiches. Is a pita a sandwich? Is a calzone?

- Is an open faced sandwich a sandwich? (Yes, it is.) Oh, then the filling
  doesn't even need to be enclosed by the wrapper? Well then, pizza is a
  sandwich, because what really is the difference between an open faced
  sandwich and a pizza?

When your job is to describe the relationships between data, when your job is
literally to sit around and think about stuff like "is `x` a sandwich?" then
"is a" quickly starts to fall apart.

Yes, data is relational. But inheritance still sucks. It's tightly coupled and
brittle, and "sandwich" is a nonsense word. 

Here's another approach, to return to our `Vehicle` example. Sure, a boat and a
car and a plane are all vehicles. But so is a motorcycle and a bicycle and a
horse. A vehicle can have some number of wheels, or some number of hooves.

What defines a vehicle? Some means of moving you from Point A to Point B? In
that case, is a human itself a vehicle?

Literally, what is a vehicle? What is the common ancestor of "horse",
"airplane," and "rollerblade?"

Given this mental model, for most things you're trying describe, you continue
to abstract away the common attributes and behaviors for each *thing* until the
base class is something totally stupid and useless like "object."

#### The Diamond Problem

The problem of inheriting from multiple parent classes. Also called, 
appropriately, the Multiple Inheritance problem.

"Diamond" refers to the shape of the inheritance graph:

```
   [A]      A: office machine
  /   \     B: printer
[B]   [C]   C: copier
  \   /     D: printer/copier
   [D]
```

If you are creating a multifunction office machine like a
printer/copier/fax/espresso-maker, then when you're creating functionality for
Object D, you may not need to implement your own version of `print` because
printers (Object B) and copiers (Object C) both print. But how does the program
know *which* parent `print` to use?

Most languages take care of this decision for you as a feature of that
language, so you don't have to think about it that much. But the point is, the
problem is *there*. It's a flaw inherint to this style of thinking.

#### The Banana Problem

Lastly, the Banana Problem famously describes the problem with state and
environment, and a long chain of inheritance.

> ...the problem with object-oriented languages is they've got all this implicit
> environment that they carry around with them. You wanted a banana but what
> you got was a gorilla holding the banana and the entire jungle.
>
> Joe Armstrong, Coders at Work

### Wrong Abstraction

Classes are also the wrong abstraction some/most of the time. Or least they're a *limited* abstraction.

Sometimes you do want some kind of a grouping of data and
functions. It's tempting to just reach for a class in that case, but you can do
the exact same thing with a plain old object, or maybe a function that closes over
some data and returns an object.

The point is that you can and should be a little more discerning about the
representation you need, and use an abstraction that is only as complicated as
you need it to be. First choose an object. Then a function. Then maybe a
factory function. And *then* maybe a class. Instead of just always using class,
class, class, and class.

It's kind of a case of "If the only tool you have is a hammer, every problem
looks like a nail." The ubiquity of JS classes might lead you to believe that
classes are the only tools you have, but they are not.

## How: Using Factories

Anyway, enough about stuff that's bad. How about some good stuff that you
*should* use? Back to Functional Factories in JS!

Object factories create multiple objects, and can "extend" a "base class" through
functional mixins.

### Factory 101: Creating multiple instances

This part is easy. Imagine a car.

Here is an example of object destructuring with default values:

```javascript
const createCar = ({
  make = 'toyota',
  model = 'prius',
  mpg = 80,
  seats = 4
} = {}) => {
  make, model, mpg, seats
}
```

That's an object factory. A function that recieves some data and returns an object.

You can now easily do the following:

```javascript
const car = createCar({
  make: 'Ford',
  model: 'F350',
  mpg: 10,
  seats: 2,
})
```

Boom 💥

No `new`, no `this`. Just plain old objects. Create as many cars as you want.

### Mixins: Extending a base class

Okay, this is where things get a whole lot more functional.

Functional mixins are a good way to avoid and overcome many of the challenges
and downfalls of classical inheritance.

They are able to do this because they, as one is encouraged to do even in OOP
communities, favor *composition* over *inheritance*.

Imagine, again, we are describing vehicles.

- Don't do this: try to describe some useless, universally abstract base class like `object` that all possible vehicles can inherit from

- Instead do this: just start describing attributes, qualities, and functionality. Keep all those little descriptions in a drawer, and you can mix and match them later to create things.

Here's a mixin for movement:

```javascript
const withMovement = o => {
  let isMoving = false

  return Object.assign({}, o, {
    move() {
      isMoving = true
      return this
    },
    stop() {
      isMoving = false
      return this
    },
    isMoving: () => isMoving,
  })
}
```

I can pass it an empty object and get back an object that has a couple functions
on it related to movement. Neat. No muss, no fuss.

Here's one for capacity:

```javascript
const withCapacity = (capacity = 2) => o => {
  let isFull = false;
  let availableSeats = capacity;

  return Object.assign({}, o,
    {
      getAvailableSeats: () => availableSeats,
      getCapacity: () => capacity,
      isFull: () => isFull,
      fillSeats(n) {
        if (n <= availableSeats) availableSeats -= n
        isFull = (availableSeats === 0)
        return this
      },
    }
  )
}
```

It takes a "capacity" parameter (with a default value of 2) and then an object `o`,
and returns a new object that combines `o` with some capacity related functions.

Maybe a really simple mixin that creates a new object with some number of wheels:

```javascript
const withWheels = (wheels = 4) => o => Object.assign({}, o, {
  wheels,
})
```

So now I have a few mixins to play with. I can mix and match them to create a
factory for a certain kind of vehicle. Say, a car:

```javascript
const carFactory = ({ capacity, wheels }) => pipe(
  withWheels(wheels),
  withMovement,
  withCapacity(capacity),
)({})
```

This factory takes an "init" type object including `capacity` and `wheels`, and
then passes those init values into a *pipe* of mixins.

Aside: If you're not familiar with `pipe` or `compose`, just know for now that it's a
way to pass a value through a chain of functions, getting a single output at
the end. In this case, it's the `o` object in the mixins above. Here's the
definition: `const pipe = (...fs) => (x) => fs.reduce((y, f) => f(y), x)`

Anyway, now that we have a car factory, we can create some cars:

```javascript
const bigRig = carFactory({
  capacity: 2,
  wheels: 18,
})

const bus = carFactory({
  capacity: 100,
  wheels: 4,
})
```

Look at that! We have achieved our two goals:

1. We can create multiple, unique objects with our factory
2. They have shared functionality, but not through class or even function
   inheritance, but through the assembly of a few *functional mixins*

If you want to create some different vehicles, you just keep playing Legos and
add/remove some additional mixins:

```javascript
const planeFactory = ({ capacity }) => pipe(
  // withWheels(wheels),
  canFly,
  withMovement,
  withCapacity(capacity),
)({})
const bikeFactory = ({ capacity = 1, wheels = 2 }) => pipe(
  nonMotorized,
  withWheels(wheels),
  withMovement,
  withCapacity(capacity),
)({})
const horseFactory = ({ capacity = 1, legs = 4 }) => pipe(
  nonMotorized,
  isAlive(legs),
  withMovement,
  withCapacity(capacity),
)({})
```

So you're no longer creating brittle, tightly coupled relationships between
parent and child classes, or even worse, child and parent and grandparent and
great-grandparent. Instead you have a series of entities that just happen to
share various "can", "with/has", and "is" qualities and attributes.

One place you see this kind of composition is the Entity Component System
pattern in video game development. [This post](http://archive.is/VlZ9M) was one
of my first insights into how powerful a concept it is.

## Conclusion

I don't like classes in JavaScript, but I do like plain old objects, object
factories, and functional mixins. I think they allow a more natural way of
describing data, and that they allow for data to grow in complexity without
being too fragile or tightly coupled.

## More: Resources and Notes

### Further Reading

- [The Factory Pattern - Design Patterns meet the Frontend by Colum Ferry](https://dev.to/coly010/the-factory-pattern-design-patterns-meet-the-frontend-1p2l)
- [Composing Software by Eric Elliott](https://medium.com/javascript-scene/composing-software-the-book-f31c77fc3ddc)

### Glossary

<dl>

<dt>class</dt>
<dd><ol>
<li>In "the map is not the terrain" fashion, a class is not an object, but is a
description of an object that can be used to create an object.</li>
<li>...except for in JavaScript, where a class is just syntactic sugar for a
plain old JavaScript object, providing some convenient access to its
prototype.</li>
</ol></dd>

<dt>FP</dt>
<dd>Functional Programming: a style of programming that avoids side effects and
embraces snobbery and elitism. Advanced stages of the disease cause the
afflicted to say stuff like "A monad is just a monoid in the category of
endofunctors, what's the problem?" and, ultimately, to Lisp.</dd>

<dt>Factory</dt>
<dd>That thing which facilitates the churning out of products</dd>

<dt>Mixin</dt>
<dd>When you go to Cold Stone and you have a small number of base ice creams,
and you can add extra flavor through the incorporation of different *mixins*
like oreos or peanuts. You can do the same thing with functions instead of ice
cream and add-ons.</dd>

<dt>OOP</dt>
<dd>Object Oriented Programing: a maligned practice of programming that
requires the memorization of a dozen or more Design Patterns to be consistantly
useful.</dd>

<dt>Sandwich</dt>
<dd>No idea. Literally a nonsense word that has no meaning and no definition.</dd>

</dl>
